[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Since the beginning of
time, every major religion has
references to
out-of-body experiences.
>> What we know is that
the people of power--
rulers, and priests,
and warriors--
were trained in these things.
>> They find themselves
rising up from their body
to the ceiling and then looking
back at their body lying there.
>> And you're perceiving the
world from a different vantage
point.
>> It's an experience
of an alternate reality,
an alternate kind of dimension.
>> With out-of-body experiences,
I'm seeing this world,
the world I see with
my eyes and my ears.
How is that possible
without my eyes and my ears?
Not only how is it
possible, but why?
>> My name is Jade Shaw,
and in 2014 I had a powerful
out-of-body experience
that changed my life.
So much so, that afterwards,
I left a 12-year career
in the arts to dedicate my life
to exploring consciousness.
I took a Master's degree
in transpersonal psychology
and began researching the
transformative effects
of this phenomena.
My quest for answers took
me around Britain, Europe,
and the USA, where I
met and interviewed
people who had had extraordinary
experiences similar to my own.
>> It can manifest in
a few different ways,
but one of the
conventional ways, I guess,
is this sort of feeling
of vibration occurring.
And it's as if
you have an energy
body that's getting separated.
>> The sounds, these
intercranial of like the radio
interference, the
buzzing, the thunder.
[ELECTRONIC SOUNDS]
>> And all of a sudden, this
vibration, but kind of like--
it just felt like inside.
Not so much of my lower body.
It was more like the top.
And then it was the head, and
this ringing, a really loud,
intense roar and ringing.
It was really, really
uncomfortable, really,
really intense.
And I kind of lifted my head up.
And it felt like a heavy weight.
My head was like a bowling ball.
And I'm lifting this up.
And I was like--
but I could feel
that I was separating
from my physical body.
>> What we see when we
study subjects that are able
to induce the vibrational state
is that we see that there is
a very high increment
of the gamma waves.
So we see a peak of 200
hertz in the gamma band wave.
And that's very peculiar.
That's unheard of.
This is not something
that is common.
And so what we see is
that, for a few seconds,
we see the subject
reaching up to 200 hertz.
And normally what
we see, for example,
when studies about
meditation, we
see that meditators, different
types of meditation technique
will induce 70, 80,
60 hertz per second.
But not that high.
>> I just found myself
out of the body,
just going up and up and up.
And there was no sort of
violent exiting process.
It was just this beautiful lift.
And I was just--
yeah, wow, just going with it.
>> I mean, the first
time I got outside,
I was just completely in
awe that I was flying down
the road.
>> When you're on the physical
plane, it's mind-blowing.
But then when you're on the
astral planes, the colors
and the expansiveness.
>> Astral projection
is an esoteric term.
It goes back to probably
the occult literature
from the 19th
century and before.
And it essentially
references the idea
of an astral body, which was
popularized by the Theosophical
Society.
It had an essential
idea that there's
an etheric body, an astral
body, and multiple other bodies.
But actually, in the science,
we find that only about 30%
of people actually experience
any kind of energy body
while they're having an
out-of-body experience.
>> I remember that the very
first point when I looked
at my hand and I saw that I
wasn't this physical body.
I knew I was physically
outside of it.
>> And also, my
senses are superhuman.
They're not infinite, but
they're so much better.
I can see for absolute miles.
I can zoom in to string level.
At least that's how it feels.
>> I can see everything in my
room exactly the way it was.
I can see myself
breathing, sleeping,
in the exact same
position that I was.
And when I came
back to my body, I
woke up in that same position.
I don't know what that was.
But it was more vivid
than just a dream.
It felt like I
actually left myself,
and I was on top of
myself, floating, watching
myself sleep.
>> When I spoke to my
teacher, Lama Yeshe Rinpoche,
about the differences between
lucid dreaming and out-of-body
experience, he said,
"Lucid dream in head.
Now you go out of head.
This is the point."
>> The difference between lucid
dreaming and out-of-the-body
experience, for me, mainly
is the shaking of the body.
They also can happen
when you are awake.
>> If you've only had a
few lucid dreams and a few
out-of-body experiences, they
can seem confusingly similar.
But there are absolutely
100% lucid dreams and 100%
out-of-body experiences.
But there is also a third
category of something
where you're in the lucid
dream and then can exit
into an out-of-body experience.
And even an out-of-body
experience then drops back down
into a lucid dream.
>> You can project
out of your body.
But you could then
lose it, and then you
end up in a lucid dream.
You can go through all stages.
And it's all mixed up.
So you go through normal to wake
to dream, and it's all muddled,
and it's all a bit in between.
>> My kind of reality test
for that is if I try to change
my body, to see if I say, OK,
if I'm dressed now in blue
and say, OK, purple--
if it changes, I'm dreaming.
If it doesn't change, it's an
out-of-the-body experience.
>> My wife summed this
up perfectly, actually.
She said that a lucid dream
is like gaining access
to the files in your laptop.
You have access to the files, to
the photos, to the hard drive.
That's like having access
to your internal psychology,
just as you do in a lucid dream.
But in an out-of-body
experience,
you use the laptop to
access the World Wide Web,
to access the internet, where
you have not only access
to your own internal files,
your own internal psychology,
but actually to the huge,
collective psychology,
the universal mind itself.
>> And I suspect
what's taking place--
the pineal gland in the
brain, this tiny little object
in the center of the
brain, is generating
in some way substances
that actually
alter our states
of consciousness,
seem to open our
doors of perception
to perceiving a much
broader reality.
>> Out-of-body experiences
occur within an altered state.
What is an altered state?
It is any experience of
non-ordinary perception.
Could be as little as
a daydream, as much
as hypnosis and
psychedelic experience.
>> It seems that where there's
a kind of an overlap between one
form of reality and another,
and they seem to overlap
in the mind.
There's been a lot of
research done in this,
and it's called the
metachoric model.
It's the idea that
we carry a model
of reality inside our heads.
And we travel within
that model of reality.
But it doesn't mean that
model of reality isn't real.
It just means it's a
different form of reality.
>> The psyche, or the soul, is
a whole dimension of reality.
And that's key, because it's--
yeah.
It's the bardos for
the Tibetan Buddhists.
It's the imaginal realms,
the sufis call it.
Because it is the imagination,
but not the imagination
as something unreal,
but the imagination
as a transcendent reality, as
something which is more real,
in a way.
>> What most stood out was
how vivid the experience was.
It was very vivid for me.
In terms of the sequentials
of how it actually happened--
coming out of my body,
snapping back in--
I'm not too sure
how that happened.
But the key moment
was the fact I
was able to observe
everything as it was.
>> But even the most ordinary--
The self is not a
soul, or a spirit,
or an astral body or something
that lives inside us.
Well, lots of people
believe it is.
In an out-of-body
experience, you
are not traveling in
the real physical world,
going to all these
different places.
You're traveling in
your own imagination,
in the potential
of your own mind.
>> If it's all in
our imagination,
how does this explain verified
experiences in which the person
brings back information they
couldn't have known before?
Out-of-body experience
researcher Graham Nicholls
has had such an experience.
>> So my Soho bombing
experience happened in 1999.
And I was with a group
of friends, basically.
And I was teaching
the G Technique,
which is one of the methods
that I use to induce
an out-of-body experience.
I went into a very deep
trance, probably the deepest
I've ever experienced, or
definitely one of the deepest.
And I found myself standing
on the corner of Moore Street
and Old Compton Street
in central London.
And I was looking down
on Compton Street,
and I saw an explosion burst
out from the right-hand side
of the street.
And then I saw the sort
of chaos ensue as people
realized what had happened.
And then I felt this strong,
emotional sort of energy
hit me in the chest.
And I came back to my body.
But I was still in this quite
deep void, trance-like state.
And I stayed in that state until
one of the other people that
was there with me sort of coaxed
me out of this deep trance.
And then I described
to them what
I'd seen, that I'd seen
this bombing in Soho.
And I had this strong
conviction that I
felt that it was precognitive.
And essentially five
days later, there
was a bombing in that
location, as I'd seen it
in the out-of-body experience.
>> Perhaps, if during an
out-of-body experience we
don't perceive space and
time in the same way,
could we potentially tap into
wider realities beyond the five
senses?
This question led me
to the Monroe Institute
in Virginia, USA, a
leading establishment
which has been researching this
phenomena for over 40 years.
In fact, declassified
US government documents
have revealed that
in 1978 the CIA
sent several of their officers
to the Monroe Institute
to learn techniques which could
be used by spies to gain enemy
intelligence.
One of the teachers who was
offered similar training
is author William Buhlman.
>> Before, I was clueless about
the nature of reality, really.
And I wasn't a believer
in any of this stuff.
I did not believe out-of-body
experiences existed at all.
To me, this was just
a theory that somebody
had presented to me.
So I tried a
technique for 24 days.
And on the 24th day, I had my
first out-of-body experience,
which was a life-changer--
total, total, life-changer.
One day, during a typical--
let's just say the
initiation of the experience,
I found myself shooting up
through layers of color.
And it was shocking.
It was a little scary,
to put it quite clearly.
Next thing I know, I feel
like I'm going to lose it.
I feel like my entire
consciousness is being
stretched across the universe.
And the end result
is I'm floating
in a sea of white light.
Suddenly you go
from being focused
on the physical is the only
reality to, oh, my god,
there is a multi-dimensional
continuum here
we can explore and
experience firsthand.
>> And around these times, I'm
trying to preach the gospel.
You know?
I'm trying to spread
the good word.
Listen, guys.
Listen!
There's more to
life than you think.
[MEDITATION GONG RINGS]
And then, naturally, they're
like, you're crazy, man.
You're crazy.
What are you talking about?
>> They just thought
I have a witch craft,
especially in the
African community is that
you're a witch, or you're
some type of occult priest
or whatever.
So there's a lot of
stigma behind it.
>> It came to a certain point in
my life where I almost came out
about these experiences.
I just became--
I just didn't want
to hide it anymore.
>> I've had people say I'm
initiated to the Illuminati.
I'm initiated in all kinds of--
[LAUGHS]
>> It's a weird feeling because
you're seeing stuff that not
everybody sees but you
thought everyone did.
So sometimes what
becomes normal to you
you've got to realize,
actually that's not
normal to these people.
>> I will give my opinion
about out-of-body experiences.
That is normal.
What is not normal
is not to have them.
The problem is that
we are traumatized,
energetic body gets
stuck in your feet.
If we weren't traumatized
by life and by beliefs,
everyone would be having them.
>> 20 years ago, I did an
extensive study that involved
18,000 people.
It was a survey done,
which I published
in "Secret of the Soul."
And it was amazing that it was--
number one, it's universal.
The experience
itself is universal.
It doesn't matter
about the culture.
And that's important.
But beyond that,
people were having
the same kind of experiences.
>> In Nahuatl tradition, it was
practiced mainly because when
you die, in the furthest
step of your death,
your energetic double will
need to split and decide where
the rest of the energy
is going to exit from.
For an out-of-the-body
experience,
the three exits are the
navel, that it can take you
to the underworlds.
And the underworlds are
all the pieces of your mind
that are lost in dreams,
in traumatic experiences
like that.
Here is to navigate this world.
This one takes you
to the heavens.
[BELL RINGING]
[CHANTING]
>> So within Tibetan Buddhism,
out-of-body experience practice
is used primarily as a
training for death and dying.
Because you're having a
rehearsal for that separation
of the energy body from
the physical body, which
is exactly what will happen
in the death and dying states.
Within Tibetan Buddhism,
out-of-body experience
is known as special
dream body practice.
Now, this is confusing
because they're
using the term dream body here.
But what we need
to understand is
that, within the Tibetan
Buddhist belief system,
there is the secondary dream
that we have at nighttime.
But there is also the primary
dream of waking existence,
because this experience
of everyday reality
is not seen as full reality.
It is seen like a
dream-like illusion that we
are co-creating into existence,
and a dream in which we are not
fully awake and aware.
Through the practice of
out-of-body experience,
we can become more awake
in the shared dream.
>> I can recall a few where
people actually contacted
and had direct contact
with dead loved ones.
And they communicated with
them directly, and not
just through using
a trance medium
or some kind of channeling.
So we're not talking
about any intermediary.
This is a face-to-face
conversation
with a loved one like a father
or a mother that's passed.
>> One of the most life-changing
OBEs I ever had was when I met
my dad after he died.
And I had a lot of
guilt surrounding it
and the things that I had done.
It was just the
most awful feeling.
And about 90 days
after he died, I
had an out-of-body experience.
And I went specifically
to look for him.
When I came back
from that, that guilt
just lifted, which was really
something I had no control
over.
My logical brain was
trying to work out
whether that was
even really him,
how much can I trust
this experience.
It was doing all the
logical brain things.
But my actual physiology
just totally changed.
That heavy, horrible
guilt just went.
>> Some out-of-body experiences
can occur spontaneously
in extreme situations such
as pregnancy and labor,
intense panic attacks, and
near-death experiences.
In 2016, the world's largest
medical near-death study
was led by Dr. Sam Parnia from
New York University's Langone
Institute for Medicine.
He looked at 2,060
cardiac arrests
and found that, in many cases,
consciousness can remain active
after someone flatlines.
This challenges
perceived notions
around the clinical
timing of death
and raises questions about the
nature of consciousness itself.
I caught up with
"New York Times"
best-selling author Eben
Alexander, a neurosurgeon
who had a near-death
experience that
dramatically changed his life.
>> It was a severe case of
bacterial meningoencephalitis.
The human part of my
brain, the entire surface,
was attacked and heavily damaged
by a primitive bacterium that
should have killed me,
certainly should have gotten rid
of anything but
the most primitive
of conscious experiences.
And yet, as I went
through that weeklong coma
due to meningitis and
destruction of the cortex,
I actually experienced a far
greater kind of awareness
and conscious experience.
>> The near-death experience is
when someone survives a close
brush with death, and they
experience a set of components
as well.
It might start with the
out-of-body experience
where they may leave their body
and look down at the emergency
situation from above.
They may describe going
through a dark tunnel
towards a bright light.
And they feel very drawn
towards that light,
almost like it's got
a magnetic quality.
Once they're in the light,
they can find themselves
in beautiful surroundings
with lush, green grass,
vividly-colored flowers.
Maybe there's a stream
in the background.
And this is where they often
meet deceased relatives
or friends.
Sometimes they meet a religious
figure which is usually
associated with their culture.
They may also meet
just a being of light
or sense a presence around them.
>> I experienced multiple
different realms.
It began in an earthworms-eye
view, a very primitive,
coarse, unresponsive realm.
But all of that shifted
very dramatically
when I was ushered
up through a portal,
through a circle of
light, a melody of sound,
into a brilliant, ultra-real
valley, the gateway valley.
A lot of earthly features, but
it was like a world of ideals.
Everything was perfect.
And encountering higher
souls and guardian angels,
all that was perfectly
real in that realm.
>> I wanted to see if the
near-death experience was just
some form of hallucination as
the brain was shutting down.
What I kind of found
with my research
is that some people
gained information,
in ways other than
through the senses,
that they weren't
previously aware of.
One of the patients
in my study, he
met one of his
deceased relatives.
And as part of his
near-death experience,
she gave him a message.
And she said, you've
got to go back to life.
And when you go back, tell
this relative this message.
So when he did revive,
he gave this message
to the living relative.
And she was absolutely
astounded that he
should know that information.
>> To me, as a conventional
neuroscientist,
that absolutely demanded
some explanation because it
completely defied everything
that modern neuroscience thinks
it knows about the
neocortex, and the brain,
and its relationship
to consciousness.
>> I don't think the near-death
experience is a brain
phenomenon.
I think it's wider than that.
I think what
happens is the brain
in some way is compromised,
either through fear
or through damage, and during
that the image of the body
somehow deteriorates within the
brain and this new form arises.
>> People tend to lose fear
of death after near-death
experiences.
And I think fear
of death in itself
is extremely transformational.
Once you lose fear
of death, everything
changes in your life.
>> No fear of death.
I know this is not it.
And it's not nothing that
somebody has told me.
It's something that
I've experienced myself,
so that's a truth that
nobody can take away.
>> But then I suppose I was kind
of in the you're born, you die,
and that's it kind of group.
Today I'm a bit like you're
born, you die, and that's it?
Do people still believe
that mumbo jumbo?
>> It definitely
confirmed it for me.
Yeah, you believe it, but
you don't-- look, with me,
I have to see something
to believe it.
I have to see it, and
then I'm like, OK.
And I've seen so much
now that I have no doubt
that when you die it's
just your physical body
you're leaving behind.
But it's your consciousness--
when people say
your soul, you can
call it your soul, your astral
body, your consciousness,
it doesn't matter.
It's all one thing.
But it's that that
leaves, that goes on.
>> The most meaningful thing
to take away from out-of-body
experiences is that you're
more than your physical body.
>> Obviously, if I'm about
to get run over by a car,
I'm jumping out the way.
But I'm not afraid
for it to happen.
>> It brings acceptance of
life, acceptance of the reality
of life and of death.
So that feeling of acceptance
is incredibly transformational.
[ELECTRONIC MUSIC]
>> DMT, often called
the spirit molecule,
is a chemical substance found
within almost all plants
and animals.
Some people have claimed that
near-death-like experiences
can result from ingesting DMT.
But are they really
the same thing?
>> Near-death experiences are
typically more kind of earthly
in their origin.
So you may see the room itself,
and perhaps your body in it
from a distant body perspective
with an out-of-body experience.
With DMT, typically
you're in another world
altogether, a world composed
of energy, and geometry,
and strange beings.
So it's an
out-of-body experience
of a kind, which if you tick
a box on a questionnaire
looks similar, but
phenomenalogically
the actual content of the
experience is very different.
>> The similarities between DMT
experiences and NDEs are quite
limited.
And most of the
powerful features,
the most striking
features of NDEs,
do not feature in
DMT experiences,
like the life review,
or the contact
with deceased relatives, or
the sense of entering a tunnel,
and so on.
>> DMT is also one of those
substances will induce
out-of-body experiences.
Perhaps not to the same
extent as ketamine,
but there are some
differences, however.
DMT experiences
often are concurrent
with geometric patterns
or the encounters
with pixies and elves,
which you don't typically
get on out-of-body experiences.
It can help us,
perhaps though, try
and explain
out-of-body experiences
because DMT is naturally
occurring in the human body.
But there's not a
1-to-1 relationship
between the two experiences.
>> The doors of perception
was William Blake,
the idea that our perceptions
only give us a very small part
of reality.
But sometimes, with
mind-altering substances--
dimethyltryptamine, for
instance, as an example--
suddenly it broadens out,
and the doors of perception
are opened.
And suddenly our
perceptions are much wider.
>> One particular experience I
had was deeply profound in that
I had become a point
of consciousness.
And on the journey
back, I came back
and I could see these
strange creatures.
And I was like, whoa.
And then I realized I was
looking at myself and my friend
on the floor.
For me, it was deeply profound.
I'd say that experience
has influenced my thinking
about the nature of reality
in that I'm certainly
very open to the idea
that consciousness is
a separate entity to the body.
>> In 2002, when a
neuroscientist called Olaf
Blanke was operating on
an epileptic patient,
with electrodes
all over the brain,
and he could stimulate
different places.
And he discovered
that if he stimulated
a spot on the right
temporoparietal junction,
he could produce bodily
distortions or, at the extreme,
a complete out-of-body
experience.
So we know that that spot,
disturbed, can produce
an out-of-body experience.
Why?
>> Those studies that have
tried to induce out-of-body
experience through electric
stimulation or neuromodulation,
they are very interesting.
But the question is
does that mimic, really,
the real experience or not?
Because when you are stimulating
areas of the brain associated
with smell, the person
is, for example,
perceiving the smell
of a strawberry.
The aroma of the strawberry
is not there present.
But the person can record,
and can even smell,
or have the impression
of the smell.
>> The area of the brain
that is stimulating produces
an experience that's not
very consistent with the type
of experiences people have,
what I would consider a genuine
out-of-body experience.
So a sense of moving
over a distance,
going to another location,
perceiving things accurately
that are happening around them--
things like that don't
happen in these kinds
of induced experiences using the
TPJ, temporoparietal junction.
>> There are places you can
stimulate the brain to mimic
certain experiences, but
one should not be confused
by thinking that those kinds
of tricks and various ways
of demonstrating relationships
between some types
of electrical or magnetic
stimulation and phenomenal
experience, that you can
then assume, oh, well,
that's the cause of all of them.
And that's one of
the biggest mistakes.
>> So the types of things
that happen are not really
consistent with an
out-of-body experience,
which is essentially what I
think many of the skeptics do.
They use this what
I would consider
overly broad definition,
which then means
that you could pretty
much define anything
as an out-of-body experience.
>> How real is this phenomena
that is induced by this
electric stimulation?
Because you can say
that you are just
stimulating the impression of
it, not the real phenomena.
That is what we would
think is related
to out-of-body experience.
>> I don't think the experiences
are caused by neurological
activity.
I think they happen at a
level beyond the brain.
If there are any brain
changes, any changes
to neurological activity,
they are produced
by the change in consciousness.
>> My view of consciousness
is that it's not created
by the brain, that the
brain acts as a filter.
I think that's very important.
I've now seen many, many
people with very wide states
of consciousness.
You just cannot explain this
on a simple neurophysiological
principle.
>> What we find with research
done in hospitals now is that
people who are clearly in
cardiac arrest are experiencing
a heightened state
of consciousness,
which really contradicts
our understanding,
or the current materialist
perspective that the brain
produces consciousness.
>> The argument is, yes, the
brain is disturbed somehow.
But the brain isn't functioning.
Oh, yes, it is, they say.
Little bit just around the back.
Rubbish.
No.
To get these very
wide experiences,
you have to have many areas of
the brain functioning properly
or it's somewhere else.
And I think it somewhere else.
>> Consciousness
is a fundamental,
universal quality which is
everywhere and in everything.
But there is also our own
individual consciousness,
which can't be separated from
fundamental consciousness
because our own individual
consciousness is
an influx, you could say, of
fundamental consciousness.
>> The body is an avatar.
Consciousness is the player.
If you play the Sims game,
you make all the choices
and decisions for
the Sims character.
The Sims character is
just a computed shape,
a computed form.
It's just information,
just like in our reality.
So that gets us to the
point of understanding
that consciousness
is not in the body.
It's separate from the body.
It's the player.
>> We normally
think of the self,
or feel that the
self is a me in here,
looking out through my eyes.
That is just not
on, given everything
we know about the brain, the
way the visual system works,
everything else.
There can't be
somebody in there.
There's no center for the
brain where we can be,
and so on, and so on.
>> There isn't anything
out there, or in here.
This is the confusion.
It's all the same thing.
And what we think
is physical matter
is actually created by the
mind, by consciousness.
>> So I think the main role
of the brain is not to produce
consciousness, but to canalize
or transmit fundamental
consciousness into
our individual being.
>> People experience
them all the time,
right across the world.
But scientists just
don't want to know.
Doesn't fit in.
>> There's three reasons why
they don't get taken seriously
enough.
One is they're still
relatively rare experiences.
I don't sometimes see.
I see whenever I open
my eyes, thank goodness.
But I only sometimes
have those experiences.
They're on the cutting
edge of where we're going.
It's kind of a new possibility
that hasn't really--
some people better than
others, all that stuff.
That's the first reason.
The second reason is
science only looks
at the sensual world.
So it says that doesn't
exist, or that's just
an illusion or a byproduct.
So it dismisses
it theoretically,
and therefore it doesn't want
to look at it, which is a shame.
Because the odd things are
where the new understanding
will come from.
And the third thing is,
in the causal world,
the material world, you can
reproduce things, generally.
The more complicated it is,
the harder is to reproduce it.
So experiences like
telepathy happen in a story.
They happen because something
occurred for my loved one.
Well, you can't make
that happen in a lab.
>> An awakening experience is
a temporary intensification
of awareness in which the world
becomes more real and in which
a person transcends separateness
and feels that they are part
of all reality.
And anybody can have an
awakening experience.
They occur in all kinds
of different situations.
They occur spontaneously, in
the midst of everyday life,
or some people may
cultivate them consciously
through spiritual practices.
[BELL RINGS]
>> So I was just literally
relaxing on the sofa.
Baby was asleep upstairs,
husband washing up.
Completely mundane
sort of scenario.
And then I just felt energy
starting to come through me.
And then it started
to get even bigger.
And I'm like, OK,
this is beyond you.
I was extremely
peaceful about it
because I somehow knew that
something really significant
was happening.
And the energy
continued to expand.
And I remember, in
that very moment,
understanding everything
about why I got ill.
All my experience
identifying and attaching
to the body, and my
mind, and my ego,
and my spirit was
all in a place that I
didn't recognize my true self.
>> You just can't even describe
these kind of experiences.
And it makes that entire
shift of consciousness,
and you just feel like
your entire self is just
totally open to the universe
and to all the answers.
>> There is this enormous
love, this huge oneness,
a feeling that all my questions
dissolved into an understanding
beyond words.
>> Quite often, there is
something more in out-of-body
experiences-- there was for me--
than just the extraordinary
sensation of seeming
to be somewhere else
than your body is.
Something ineffable,
something that I would
call a mystical experience.
>> Although the experience
of awakening is temporary,
it has very powerful,
long-lasting after effects.
So a person may
feel that they've
been given a heightened
awareness, a glimpse of a wider
and deeper reality.
And as a result, they feel
more optimistic, more trusting
of the world.
They have a sense that
their normal awareness
is, in some sense,
limited, that there
is a wider awareness beyond
what they normally perceive.
>> I think awakening
is the leading edge
of the evolutionary process,
or it's beginning to be now.
It's taking off
much more because we
have individuated so much.
>> We're coming into more of
an awareness of ourselves.
So, physiologically, I feel
like we've kind of maxed out
our technology in terms of
what this car can do, the body.
But in terms of
our consciousness,
I feel like we can just go
into spaces that we just
haven't explored yet.
>> It looks to me as if we are
in the process of developing,
I think.
And I think the human
species has the ability
to enter very, very wide
states of consciousness.
>> Do you think it's linked
to evolution in some way?
>> I would have thought
so, because evolution looks
as if it's progressive.
>> The whole universe
has been individuating.
I mean, it just blows my mind.
13.8 billion years
ago the universe
was hydrogen and helium.
Now look!
I mean, it's gone from
basic gases to this!
I mean, wow!
That's how individuated.
And then that's happened
on every level--
physical individuation,
bio-logical individuation
into species, and then
soul individuation
into individual souls.
And that's a very high
level of individuation,
which is why, when
you meet people,
they're really themselves.
We're all different.
And I think that has allowed
us to become more and more
conscious, to the point
where we can now be conscious
that we are conscious.
>> Things evolve
to be efficient.
Things don't evolve to be
inefficient and wasteful.
Matter of fact, that's
the key idea in evolution,
is that things change, and the
things that are inefficient
go away.
>> As we enter an age where
artificial intelligence is
swiftly moving beyond the
confines of the simple computer
and machine, perhaps we're
also entering an age where
consciousness will move beyond
the confines of the human body.
>> The most common after effects
of out-of-body experiences seem
to be very positive and very
similar to that of some kinds
of mystical experiences.
They become less
afraid of death,
less concerned about material
goods and having stuff,
and more interested in other
people and relationships.
>> Directly after
that experience,
I remember running down the
stairs with this massive smile
on my face, like
I'd met God, yeah?
Just fearless, just kind of
like I'd had this epiphany of I
can do anything I
want with my life.
>> Before, I would say that
I was pretty much scared.
So I feel a lot braver now.
And also, I think before
my experiences I would get
stressed quite quickly or
I could snap quite quickly,
whereas now I definitely
feel I'm a lot more chilled.
>> The most common one that
people describe to me would
probably be some loss of
fear in different forms.
Sometimes it's in fear
of the unknown, fear
of what an out-of-body
experience could be.
It might be in a very
basic level like that.
But at another time,
it might literally
be that they're not so
fearful of literally going out
of the house.
Or they're not so
focused on the fear
that the television and the
news and all of that creates.
They kind of seem to reach
this point where that
becomes less important to them.
>> I just became much
bolder and more daring.
And I guess I just learned
this big, obvious truth, which
is that there's nothing
to fear but fear itself.
And that was
life-changing, basically.
>> I was always
terrified of education.
But I feel that, again, being
on this spiritual path which
the OBEs have
ultimately led me to has
helped me walk in
faith, where, before,
that I was walking in fear.
>> It seems to also be used
as a way to kind of lessen
ego-clinging because if you can
have an experience of shifting
out of this gross
corporeal form,
seeing that you're more than
your physical body, you also,
in some way, see that you're
more than your ego mind,
or the egocentric mind
that is so heavily attached
to the physical form.
>> They help you understand that
life isn't just getting through
this physical process.
It's not just getting
up, going to work,
coming home, watching TV,
getting something to eat.
It's not that treadmill.
>> I see myself building
a foundation for people.
I have something called
CYF, Creating Young Futures.
It's a branch of education where
people could come and explore
their own uniqueness.
And it's just changed the way
I want to impact the world.
>> For many people, the
transformative effects
of out-of-body experiences
seem to come through a visceral
experience of awe.
In 2003, psychologists
Haidt and Keltner
published a landmark
scientific study
on the social and
emotional functions of awe.
They said that it
appeared to increase
people's feelings of
connectedness and willingness
to help others, and
that moments of awe
could be one of the most swift,
powerful, and permanent ways
to personal change.
>> A lot of people find that
they become more tolerant
of other people as well, and
more compassionate, and caring,
and loving towards
other peoples.
>> I care more for animals.
I've become a vegan, which
I never thought I'd say.
But I've got in touch with
this emotional side of myself.
Even find myself--
I cried at "Planet
of the Apes," right?
I swear.
And then I was like,
what's going on?
What's happening to me?
>> That's the area that
may have changed the most.
Relationships have been
a real transformative
and emerging learning
curve and experience.
>> Emotionally, I've
become very, I'd say,
more caring and more loving,
more motivated to become
the best version of myself.
>> Some people have horrible,
terrifying out-of-body
experiences.
They're pretty uncommon,
maybe 5% of all of them.
That can have unpleasant
after effects.
But the vast majority of
effects are very positive.
>> And I was even questioning,
maybe I've lost my mind.
Maybe that was some
type of psychosis.
I mean, honestly,
it could have been.
But it was too vivid and too
real of an experience for me
to say that,
because I would have
had reoccurring experiences
like that in my mind
again if that was the case.
>> What you find in an
out-of-body state has a lot
to do with what you
bring to that state--
the state of your
mind, your attitude,
what you know, what you
don't know, your beliefs.
>> People that astral
project, like yourself--
if I look at you, I
look at the people.
You are brave because
it's terrifying at first.
It's terrifying.
But once you get past
that, you lose all that,
and it becomes amazing.
>> Some astronauts
have described how,
when they look back at the
Earth from outer space,
there is a significant
shift in perception.
National boundaries dissolve.
Identity widens.
And they feel a deep
interconnectivity
with all beings.
This is called the
overview effect.
Is it possible that people
who look back at their body
have a similar experience?
>> It breaks you out
of all the old molds,
and makes you aware
that, oh, my god,
there's something very
powerful and immortal.
And I'm part of it.
And I'm connected to it.
>> It's just a mask, in a way, a
kind of coat that we're wearing
to have certain experiences.
But in reality, we're just
infinitely bigger than that.
>> So in terms of the link
between self-realization
and, for me, the out-of-body
experience were synonymous.
They were the same thing.
>> What we're waking
up from is the past.
We're waking up from
our own unconsciousness.
So there's a general movement
towards something more, which
is natural in the very
fabric of what existence is,
because it's the constant
realization of ever
greater potential.
>> Whether or not consciousness
can expand beyond the body is
still yet to be proved
by mainstream science.
But what is evident is
that, for many people,
these are deeply meaningful
experiences that can shape
their lives in profound ways.
Reduced fear of death, awakening
experiences, new perspectives
on relationships, transforming
fears, receiving life insights,
and healing grief can all arise
from out-of-body experiences.
If fully integrated, they
can be a powerful catalyst
for psychological
and spiritual growth,
and in some cases can lead to
radical self-transformation.
>> The thing that struck me most
is how much doing this research
has opened my eyes and
opened my mind as well.
I think I was very scientific
because of my training
as a nurse when I started it.
But now, what it's
made me realize
that there's things
out there that we
have no understanding of.
>> It bothers me greatly that
there are people out there who
are having disturbed
sleep phenomena--
like sleep paralysis,
and night terrors,
and all these kind of things--
that don't know that they're
sitting on a gold mine.
>> It's a natural
human capacity.
There's nothing special about
having out-of-body experiences.
In fact, possibly what
special or remarkable
is the fact that people
don't have them more.
>> If you are going to do
it, it's with the purpose
of rescuing the traumatized
places of your mind,
or to create things
in the heavens.
That would make a
huge difference.
>> If all seven billion people
had an out-of-body experience,
it would suddenly be a
collective consciousness
wake-up call.
Everyone would go, oh, my god.
What are we fighting over?
A hunk of dirt?
>> Well, I think the important
thing for all of your viewers
to realize is that they
are very crucial in this.
No soul left behind.
We are all very
important in this journey
of awakening of humanity.
>> So if that
happened collectively,
if everybody underwent an
awakening experience and felt
this sense of connection
and compassion,
then the world would become
an infinitely better place.
>> You will find
yourself out there.
You will find your limitations.
You will find your beliefs.
That is valuable to you, to see
deeper into who you are, deeper
into why you're here, and deeper
into the nature of reality.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Can you describe an
out-of-body experience for you
in one word?
>> In one word?
Awareness.
>> Extraordinary.
>> Puzzling.
>> Epic.
[LAUGHS]
>> Transcendence of
identification with the body.
>> Shocking.
>> Expansive.
>> Live.
>> Wonder.
>> Ineffable.
>> Mysterious and fun.
>> Mystical.
>> Fantastic, for the
people who have it.